You mentioned anxiety before. Uh imagine
how effective you'd be if you weren't
anxious all the time is is one of yours.
And anxiety is the emotion dour of the
21st century. And lots of driven people
very anxious, very paranoid. That's
what's caused them to be affected. It
pays so much attention, detail oriented,
not letting things go, staying up at
night thinking about it. That's the
paranoia coming in. What have you come
to learn about anxiety and dealing with
it? So anxiety and stress are
interesting. They're very related.
Stress is when uh like if you look at an
iron beam, when an iron beam is under
stress, it's because it's being bent in
two different directions at the same
time. So when your mind is under stress,
it's because it has two conflicting
desires at once. So for example, you
know, you you want to be liked, but you
want to do something selfish and you
can't reconcile the two and so you're
under stress. Uh you want to do
something for somebody else, you want to
do something for yourself, right? These
are examp you you don't want to go to
work but you want to make money so
you're under stress, right? So you have
two conflicting desires and I think one
of the ways to get through stress is to
acknowledge that oh I actually have two
conflicting desires and either I need to
resolve it. I need to pick one and then
be okay losing the other or I will
decide later. But at least just being
aware of why you're stress can help
alleviate a lot of stress. And then
anxiety, I think, is sort of this
pervasive unidentifiable stress where
you're just kind of stressed out all the
time and you're not even sure why and
you can't even identify the underlying
problem. I think the reason for that is
because you you have so many uh
unresolved problems, unresolved stress
points that have piled up in your life
that you can no longer identify what the
problems are. And there's this mountain
of garbage in your mind and it's a
little bit of it poking out the top like
an iceberg and that's anxiety. But
underneath there's a lot of unresolved
things. And so you just need to kind of
go through very carefully every time
you're anxious. Like, okay, why am I
anxious this time? I don't know why. Oh,
well, let me sit here and just think
about it. Let me let me write down what
the possible causes could be. Let me
meditate on it. Let me journal. Let me
talk to a therapist. Let me talk to my
friends. Let me just kind of see like
when does that stress go away? If you
can kind of identify and unravel and
resolve these issues, then I think that
helps get rid of anxiety. uh a lot of
the anxiety is piled up because we move
through life too quickly not observing
our own reactions to things. We don't
resolve them. So this goes counter to
what I was saying earlier about not
reflecting too much on things. But you
reflect on the problems to observe them
and solve them. You don't reflect on
them to feel better about to indulge
them. Well, if if if you're doing it to
just feel better about yourself, that
could be strengthening your personality
and your ego and could be creating a
more fragile personality. Um, you know,
one one big anxiety resolver for me is
just ruminating on death. I think that's
a good one. You're going to die. It's
all going to zero. You cannot take
anything with you. And I know this is
trit. And I know the the we don't spend
enough time thinking about the big
questions. We kind of give up on them
when we're very, very young. You know, a
little child might ask the big questions
like, why are we here? What's the
meaning of life? What is this all about?
You know, is there Santa Claus? Is there
God? But then as adults, we're taught
not to think about these things or we've
given up on them. But I think the big
questions are the big questions for good
reasons. And uh if you can keep the idea
in front of you at all times that you're
going to die and that everything goes
literally to
zero. What's there to stress about?
Yeah. For better or worse, life is very
short. How should people deal with its
briefness?
Enjoy
it. Make the best of it. You know, it's
it's even briefer than that. Each moment
just disappears. it's gone. There's only
a present moment and it's gone
instantly. So if you're not if you're
not there for it, if you're stressed out
or you're anxious or you're thinking
about something else, you missed it. So
you're any moment when you're not in
that moment, you are dead to that
moment. You might as well be dead
because your mind is off doing something
else or you know living in some imagined
reality that is just a very poor
substitute for the actual reality. So
one of my recent realizations was what
is wasted time? What is a what is a
waste of time? So I don't like to waste
time but what is wasted time? And
everything is wasted time in a sense
because nothing matters in the ultimate.
Uh but in each moment the thing matters.
In each moment it's the only thing that
matters actually the what's happening in
front of you is literally has all the
meaning in the world. And so what
matters is just being present for the
thing. So if you're doing something that
you want to do and you're fully there
for it, then it's not wasted time. If
you don't want to do it and your mind is
running away from it and you're reacting
against it and you're wishing you were
somewhere else and you're thinking about
some other thing or you're anticipating
some future thing or regretting some
past thing or being fearful of
something, then that's wasted time.
That's time that's being wasted when
you're not actually present for the
reality in front of you. So my
definition of wasted time, yes I do want
some material things in life and I you
know there there are things that have
more value than others within this life
but this life is very short and bounded.
So the true wasted time is a time that
you're not present for when you are not
there for it. When you're not doing the
thing you want to do to the best of your
capability such that you're immersed in
it. If you're not immersed in this
moment then you're wasting your time.
People get worried about dying and no
longer being here, but they don't
realize that so much of their life is
spent not being here in any case. That's
right. But and I think people crave
being here for it. And and and when
you're here for it, you're actually not
thinking about yourself. You are more
immersed in the thing, the the moment,
the task at hand. We don't want peace of
mind. We want peace for our mind. That's
right. Yeah. You don't peace. The mind
is what can eat you alive if you let it.
And there's more to you than the mind.
How so?
Well, I mean the
very I don't want to disassemble the
body, so to speak, right? Because please
go on. Yeah. At the end of the day, like
everything arises within your
consciousness, right? You you got
nowhere else to experience it. Sorry.
You've got nowhere else to experience.
Nowhere else to experience it. And that
consciousness is uh relatively static in
the sense that it's been exactly the
same from the moment you were born to
the moment you die. And everything that
you experience from your body from your
mind to the world to to everything is
within that consciousness. Uh and that
thing that base layer of being and this
is what the Buddhists will tell you is
the real thing. Everything that comes
and goes in the middle including your
mind including your body is unreal. And
trying to find stability in those
transient things is is your castle that
you're building on sand that's going to
crumble. Life is going to play out the
way it's going to play out. There will
be some good and some bad. Most of it is
actually just up to your interpretation.
You're born, you have a set of sensory
experiences, and then you die. How you
choose to interpret those experiences is
up to you. And different people
interpret them in different ways. Yeah.
The old line about two people walking
down the street. They're having the
exact same experience. One is h
experience. One is happy, one is sad,
right? It's a narrative in their heads.
It's how they choose to interpret. Um,
so I think when I said that, it was a
long time ago. I was talking more about
having positive interpretations and
negative interpretations. But these
days, I think it's better just not to
have any interpretations and to just
allow things to
be. You're still going to have
interpretations. You can't stop it. Uh
and nor should you try. But even that
having an interpretation is just a thing
you can leave alone.
Yeah. I really want to try and just dig
in a little more to the best way to
remind people that they should value
their time. just how brief it is that
the time that you spend ruminating,
being distracted, fears of the past,
regrets.
Well, I don't want to tell anybody how
to live their life. I would just say
that to the extent that you want to
improve your quality of life, the uh the
easiest and best way to do that is to
observe your own mind and your own
thoughts and and be a little not not
necessarily critical but um be observant
of yourself more objectively and then
you'll kind of realize your own loops
and patterns. It takes time. It's not
it's not overnight. It's not
instantaneous. So you mean letting go is
not a one-time event. Yeah. And and
there's letting go is not necessarily
even the right answer. Like yes, if
you're trying to be an enlightened being
and you know you want to live like a god
and everything's going to be perfect and
be a Buddha, sure you can let go. But uh
I think in practice it's actually quite
hard to do.
Um, I think I would say that it's uh
you're going to find a lot of
fulfillment out of life by just doing
what you want to do and genuinely
exploring what it is that you want
rather than doing what other people
expect you to do or society expects you
to do or what you might just think
should be done by default. Um, you know,
I think most older successful people
will tell you that their life was best
when they lived it unapologetically on
their own terms.
Be selfish. Holistic selfishness. We can
clip that little selfish. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. Keep running back. Bad guy. Great.
I I had this insight or a question, I
guess. How much do you think that we
should trust the voice in our heads?
Because half of wisdom suggests to rely
on your sort of bottomup intuition and
then half of it has to be sort of top
down rational as possible. How do you
navigate the tension between head and
gut in this way?
I think the gut is what decides. Um the
head is kind of what rationalizes it
afterwards. The gut is the ultimate
decision maker. If it doesn't and and
what is the gut? The gut is refined
judgment. It's taste aggregate.
Aggregated and it could be aggregated
through evolution uh and it's in your
genes and your DNA or it could be
aggregated through your experiences and
what you've thought through. The mind is
good at solving new problems and uh new
problems in the external world that have
defi defined edges you know beginnings
and ends and and
objectives. What the mind is actually
really bad at is making hard decisions.
So when you have a hard decision to make
I find it's better to yes you ruminate
on it. You think through all the pros
and cons but then you sleep on it. You
wait a couple of days. You wait until
the gut answer appears with conviction
and it feels right. And when you're
younger, it takes longer because you
just don't have as much experience. And
when you're older, uh, it can happen
much faster, which is why, you know, and
you have less time to Yeah. And old
people just more set in their ways as a
consequence, right? They know what they
want. They know what they don't want.
Um, so it takes time to develop your gut
instinct and judgment. But once you've
developed them, don't trust anything
else because you can't go against your
gut. It'll bite you in the end. Uh
usually in relationships that failed,
you can look back and say, "Oh,
actually, I knew it was going to fail
because of this reason, but I kind of
went ahead anyway because I wanted it to
be this way, right? I wanted this person
to be a different way than they are, or
I wanted to get a different thing out of
it than I thought I was going to than I
knew I was going to get, but I just
wanted it." So sometimes desire will
override your judgment and then trap.
Yeah. Wishful thinking. It traps you
into a into a pathway that chews up
time. As you get older, one thing that
becomes harder to ignore is your
testosterone levels. They impact
everything
from your energy to your mood and how
well you recover. However, there are
sciencebacked supplements like Tonat
that support testosterone strength and
recovery. And that is why I'm such a
huge fan of Momentus' product because
they make the only NSFcertified Tonat
Ali on the planet. That means it's so
rigorously tested that even Olympic
athletes can use it and why I partnered
with them because they make the most
carefully tested, highest quality
supplements on Earth. This is a huge
part of my brain, body, and sleep stack,
which makes a big impact on my
cognition, my strength, and my recovery.
And if you're still unsure, Momentous
offers a 30-day money back guarantee.
So, you can buy it and try it for 29
days. If you don't love it, they'll give
you your money back. Plus, they ship
internationally. Right now, you can get
35% off your subscription and that
30-day money back guarantee by going to
the link in the description below or
heading to
livemus.com/modernwisdom and using the
code modernwisdom a checkout. That's l i
v m o m n
o.com/modernwisdom and modern wwisdom a
checkout. Thank you very much for tuning
in. If you enjoyed that clip with Naval,
just a mere taster. The fulllength
episode is available right here.
Go on.